The Effect of a Gap Year on Outlook for The Future and on Educational Outcomes
========================================================

1. [Philip Parker](philip.parker@acu.edu.au): *Institute for Positive Psychology and Education; Australian Catholic University*
2. [Felix Thoemmes](felix.thoemmes@cornell.edu): *Cornell University*
3. [Katariina Salmela-Aro](katariina.salmela-aro@helsinki.fi): *University of Helsinki*

Abstract
----------------
The paper explores the effect of a gap year on young people's outlook for the future (life satisfaction and satisfaction with career and future prospects) and actual teriary educational outcomes (university dropout, course change, degree attainment) in a representative sample of $N = 2883$ Australian Youth (Direct university entrants: $N = 2248$; Gap Year: $N = 635$) over one pre and 5 post high-school transition time waves. Results suggest that after the application of propensity score matching direct university entrants on 700 covariates (including their interactions and quadratic terms) young peoples outlook for the future was largely unaffected by post high-school pathway with both groups experiencing an initial rise in satisfaction before considerable declines as they entered their 20's. Suprisingly, after matching actual teriary outcomes were more negative for gap-year youth. These findings have important implications for educational policy which is moving toward great support for gap-year options.

Introduction
-------------------

Gap Years have dramatically increase in popularity such that some universities are now offering financial insentives to students to undertake them (). Research in this area, however, is generally hampered by retrospective designs with no or limitied  matching of participants who undertake or do not undertake a gap-year. As such, while the majority of avaliable research suggests an extended number of benefits, there is a very real need for research that can answer counter-factual question like "Would young people outlook be more or less positive had they choosen to enter university directly rather than taking a gap year" and "Would their terary educational outcomes be better or worse". Noting that randomized control trials of differing post-school pathways are not possible, the current research seeks to address these questions using an extensive propensity score matching procedure. In particular we focus on claims in the literature that a gap-year helps resolve uncertainty around educational plans and promotes well-being (); and that those that take a gap-year have better educational outcomes ().

Methodology
--------------

###Participants

Participants were taken from the 2003 cohort of the Longitudinal Study of Australian Youth (LSAY). The LSAY database takes as its initial timewave all Australian participants from the Program of International Student Assessment (PISA; OECD, 2004). This sample of 10,370 year-olds 15 years olds is broadly representative of the Australian population of interest. They were then followed on a yearly basis for a subsequent 5 years. The sample of interest for this research is all those who, after completing year 12, applied for and were accepted to attend university. The direct entry group ($N = 2248$) consists of all those who took up the offer directly after high school. The gap-year group ($N = 635$) consisted of those who accepted a university place but defered enrollement for a year.

The nature of the PISA database required the use of a cohort sequence design. In particular, the PISA database selects 15 year-olds rather than a particular year grade in school. As such, whole all participants are approximately the same age, they are spread across multiple year groups with 71 percent in year 10, 21 percent in year 9, 9 percent in year 11, and less than 1 percent in year 8. As the current research was interested in development with respect to the post high-school transition rather than biological age we utalised a cohort sequence design to align students such that they were time wave zero (the transition wave) was the same for all participants (see Parker et al. in press). A second alignment was required for findings related to teriary educational outcomes as the gap-year group was a year behind the direct university enrollement group in relation to these outcomes. Thus, dropout, switching course major, and degree completion for the direct entry group at $T_N$ was compared to these potential outcomes in the gap-year group at $T_{N+1}$.

###Measures

The focus of this research was on the single item satisfaction measures of *How satisfied are you with your life in general* (life satisfaction), *How satisfied are you with your career prospect* (career prospects), and *How satisfied are you with your future prospects* (future prospects). In addition, university drop-out, major change, and degree completion were measured for each wave of the study. Matching variables were largely taken from the PISA wave of the LSAY database were 34 individual level variables and school average socio-economic status and achievement in math, reading, science, and problem solving. The full listing of the matching variables can be found in the online supplementary material.

###Statistical Analysis 

This research had two objective. First, to explore how individuals subjective perspectives on their satisfaction with their life in general and their career and future prospects are effected by the transition from high-school and to consider the degree to which trajectories in this variables are moderated by transition pathway. Second, to understand the effect of transition pathway on teriary educational outcomes in terms of drop-out, course major change, and degree completion. In order to address the first aim we ran a series of growth curve models where we had sufficient power to detect all available growth patterns (see Thillno, Morin, & Parker, in press). Growth models were estimated using *lavaan* () and, for propensity score adjusted models, *lavaan survey* () to account for weights. To address the second aim, multinominal logistic regression model were for drop-out, course switch, still studying, and degree completed.

**Propensity score matching**. As noted in the literature review a number of potential confounds should be considered that might bias the results in the simple unadjusted model. To control for these confounding variables we used propensity score matching to partial out the effect of confounders on the relationship between the grouping variable (gap year versus direct entry groups) and the outcome of interest (Morgan & Winship, 2007). The propensity score matching approach aims at modeling the relationship between the covariates and the treatment. We used logistic regression to estimate the propensity score and we used nearest neighbor matching where matches were allowed when participants were within .20 of the standard deviation of the logit of the propensity score. In our particular sample, many more students were in the university group than the gap-year group. In order to retain as many participants as possible, we matched up to three students in the university condition to a single comparable student in the gap-year condition. Matching was done without replacement.  The 3:1 matching resulted in a set of weights that were used in later hypothesis testing so that the effective sample size in both groups was the same (see Stuart, 2010; Thoemmes & Kim, 2011, for a review of propensity score matching procedures). Propensity score estimation and matching were done with the *Matchit* package (Ho, Imai, King, & Stuart, 2011).

**Missing data**. Missing data for the matching variables was extremly small, with only one percent of of participants with any missing data. Given that propensity score matching with missing values is not yet well developed we chose to list-wise delete this few cases. For the outlook and educational outcome variables, subject attrition was extremely low given the study followed up participants after schooling across five years. Indeed, attrition was 25 percent for the direct entry group by the final wave and only 30 percent for the gap year group (see supplementary material for exact percentage by wave), which is very low when compared to similar studies (see Parker et al., 2012a, 2012b). However, it was clear that this attrition did not represent data that were missing completely at random and as such we used full information maximum liklihood to account for missingness (see Enders, 2010; graham, 2010 for a review).
